
    Em-mongo is no longer being maintained (hasn't been for some time). If you are interested in the commit bit
    or want to take over the full project, please let me know!

= EM-Mongo

An EventMachine client for MongoDB. Originally based on RMongo, this client aims to be as api compatible
with mongo-ruby-driver as possible. 

For methods that do not retrieve data from the database the api of em-mongo should be identical (though a subset) to the mongo-ruby-driver. This includes the various update methods like insert, save and update (without the :safe flag, which is handled separately) as well as find, which returns a cursor.

For operations that require IO, em-mongo always returns an EventMachine deferrable. 

== Some examples

  #this file can be found in the examples directory. 
  # bundle exec examples/readme.rb

  #insert a few records, then read some back using Collection#find

  require 'em-mongo'
  require 'eventmachine'

  EM.run do
    db = EM::Mongo::Connection.new('localhost').db('my_database')
    collection = db.collection('my_collection')
    EM.next_tick do
      (1..10).each do |i|
        collection.insert( { :revolution => i } )
      end

      #find returns an EM::Mongo::Cursor

      cursor = collection.find 

      #most cursor methods return an EM::Mongo::RequestResponse,
      #which is an EventMachine::Deferrable

      resp = cursor.defer_as_a

      #when em-mongo IO methods succeed, they 
      #will always call back with the return
      #value you would have expected from the 
      #synchronous version of the same method from
      #the mongo-ruby-driver

      resp.callback do |documents|
        puts "I just got #{documents.length} documents! I'm really cool!"
      end

      #when em-mongo IO methods fail, they
      #errback with an array in the form
      #[ErrorClass, "error message"]

      resp.errback do |err|
        raise *err
      end

      #iterate though each result in a query

      collection.find( :revolution => { "$gt" => 5 } ).limit(1).skip(1).each do |doc|
        #unlike the mongo-ruby-driver, each returns null at the end of the cursor
        if doc
          puts "Revolution ##{doc['revolution']}"
        end
      end  

      #add an index

      collection.create_index [[:revolution, -1]]

      #insert a document and ensure it gets written

      save_resp = collection.safe_save( { :hi => "there" }, :last_error_params => {:fsync=>true} )
      save_resp.callback { puts "Hi is there, let us give thanks" }
      save_resp.errback { |err| puts "AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARGH! Oh why! WHY!?!?!" }

      collection.drop

      EM.add_periodic_timer(1) { EM.stop }

    end

  end

== Error handling

em-mongo will present errors in two different ways. First, em-mongo will raise exceptions like any other synchronous library if an error is enountered in a method that does not need to perform IO or if an error is encountered prior to peforming IO.

Errors returned by the database, or errors communicating with the database, will be delivered via standard EM::Deferrable errbacks. While it is tempting to subscribe just to a callback

  my_collection.find.defer_as_a.callback {|docs| ... }

in the case of an error you will never receive a response. If you are waiting for a response before your program continues, you will be waiting a very long time. A better approach would be to store the deferrable into a variable and subscribe to its callback and errback

  resp = my_collection.find.defer_as_a
  resp.callback { |docs| ... }
  resp.errback { |err| raise *err }

errback's blocks will always be called with a single argument which is a two element array containing the error class and the error message 

  [EM::Mongo::OperationError, "aw snap"]

== Safe Writes

As you are probably aware the default behavior for the mongo-ruby-driver, and therefore em-mongo, is to send update messages to MongoDB in a fire-and-forget manner. This means that if a unique index is violated, or some other problem causes MongoDB to raise an exception and refuse to apply your changes, you'll never know about it until you go to look for that record later. For many applications such as logging this might be OK, but for many use cases like analytics you will want to know if your writes don't succeed.

This is one place where em-mongo diverges substantially from the mongo-ruby-driver because an unsafe write will not receive a response from the server, whereas a safe write will receive a response from the server and requires a deferrable and a callback.

  #default, unsafe write
  my_collection.insert( {:a => "b" } )

  #a safe write using em-mongo
  insert_resp = my_collection.safe_insert( {:a => "b" } )
  insert_resp.callback { #all ok }
  insert_resp.errback { |err| puts '<sigh>' }

em-mongo has the following safe methods:
  safe_insert, safe_update, safe_save

In addition to calling your errback if the write fails, you can provide the usual 'safety' options that you can to Database#get_last_error, such as :fsync => true or :w => 2, to control the degree of safety you want. Please the 10gen documentation on DB#get_last_error for specifics.

  safe_insert( {:a=>"v"}, :last_error_params => { :fsync => true, :w => 5 } )

== Documentation

em-mongo now has some YARD docs. These are mostly ported directly from the mongo-ruby-driver. While they have been updated to reflect em-mongo's async API, there are probably a few errors left over in the translation. Please file an issue or submit a pull request if you notice any inaccuracies. 

http://rubydoc.info/github/bcg/em-mongo/master/frames

== Upgrading
  
**The API for em-mongo has changed since version 0.3.6.** 

em-mongo methods no longer directly accept callbacks and instead return EM::Mongo::RequestResponse objects, which are EM::Deferrable(s). This means you need to convert calls like this

  my_collection.first() { |doc| p doc }

to this

  my_collection.first().callback { |doc| p doc }

EM::Mongo::Collection#find now returns a cursor, not an array, to maintain compatibility with the mongo-ruby-driver. This provides a great deal more flexibility, but requires you to select a specific cursor method to actually fetch data from the server, such as #defer_as_a or #next

  my_collection.find() { |docs| ... }

becomes

  my_collection.find.defer_as_a.callback { |docs| ... }

If for some reason you aren't ready to upgrade your project but you want to be able to use the newer gem, you can require a compatibility file that will revert the new API to the API found in 0.3.6

  require 'em-mongo'
  require 'em-mongo/prev.rb'

This file will not remain in the project forever, though, so it is better to upgrade your projects sooner rather than later.

== What's in the box?

=== Collection

CRUD operations
  
  #find, #find_one, #save, #safe_save, #insert, #save_insert, #update, #safe_update, #remove, #find_and_modify

Index management
  
  #create_index, #drop_index

Collection management
  
  #drop, #stats, #count, #name

Server-side aggregations
  
  #map_reduce, #group, #distinct

=== Database

Collection management
  
  #collection, #collection_names, #collections, #collections_info, #create_collection, #drop_collection

Index management
  
  #drop_index, #index_information

Authentication
  
  #authenticate, #add_user

Misc
  
  #get_last_error, #error?, #name, #command

=== Cursor

Query options
  :selector, :order, :skip, :limit, :explain, :batch_size, :fields, :tailable, :transformer

Enumerable-ish
**EM::Mongo::Cursor does **not** use the Enumerable mixin for obvious reasons**
  
  #next_document, #rewind!, #has_next?, #count, #each, #to_a

Misc
  
  #batch_size, #explain, #close, #closed?

Query modifier methods
  
  #sort, #limit, #skip

== Compatibility
* em-mongo has been tested on Ruby 1.8.7 and 1.9.2
* em-mongo will not run under JRuby. We'd love some help figuring out why :) 
* Compatibility with other runtimes is unknown

== Still Missing / TODO
* Replica Sets
* GRIDFS support
* Connection pooling
* PK factories
* JRuby support

== Contact

* Twitter: @brendengrace
* IRC: bcg
* Email: brenden.grace@gmail.com

== Credit

Aman Gupta (tmm1) wrote the original RMongo which em-mongo is based on.

== References

* Rmongo: http://github.com/tmm1/rmongo
* EM-Mongo: http://github.com/bcg/em-mongo
* mongo-ruby-driver: http://github.com/mongodb/mongo-ruby-driver
* Mongo Wire Protocol: http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Mongo+Wire+Protocol

== License

(The MIT License)

Copyright © 2010 Brenden Grace

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the ‘Software’), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ‘AS IS’, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


